# Moral Value Recognition
This project was submitted as my masters thesis. Later adapted and submitted to ICASSP.

## Abstract
This study investigated trends in how moral content in song lyrics is accompanied in the musical and sonic domains. Two datasets were analyzed: a collection of 3,100 pop songs from the Billboard hot 100 list for each year 1960-2023 and a sample of 34,000 songs from the WASABI dataset. Ten moral values were extracted from the lyrics using a model developed by Preniqi (2024), based on the five pillars of morality outlined in Moral Foundation Theory - care/harm, fairness/cheating, loyalty/betrayal, purity/degradation and authority/subversion. For each song, 181 handcrafted audio features were extracted, describing the timbre, rhythm, dynamics, harmony and melody of the tracks, and used to train 10 individual XGBoost classification models to predict the presence of a given moral value. Model performance varied across different moral values. Models pre- dicting the presence of care and harm demonstrated reasonable accuracy in both datasets with maximum F1 scores of 0.68 and 0.62 respectively. Additional models with F1 scores of 0.4 or above were found for cheating, subversion, and degradation when using the WASABI dataset for training. The best performance was achieved by a model trained to distinguish between music that featured any of the positive moral values (care, fairness, etc.) versus the negative or immoral values (harm, cheating, etc.). SAGE and SHAP analyses were conducted to evaluate the contribution of individual audio features on the model’s predictions.
